20150305-1520-humanizing_numbers.md, before:

# Humanizing Numbers #

**Moderator:** Ron Nixon, The New York Times

**Speakers:**

* Ryan Gabrielson, ProPublica
* Katie Park, The Washington Post
* Nikole Hannah-Jones, ProPublica

Numbers simply represent something in the real world.

A data story doesn't need to be packed full of numbers to be powerful; choose
carefully what you need in order to tell the story, and talk about its human
impacts.

## Resegregation ##

**Premise**: Once districts were released from desegregation court orders,
their schools immediately get quite a bit more segregated.

**Interactive:** [Segregation Now](http://projects.propublica.org/segregation-now/)

**Story:** [Segregation Now](http://www.propublica.org/article/segregation-now-the-resegregation-of-americas-schools)

Created an index measuring percentage of black students attending schools in
which at least 90 percent of the students are minorities.

## Who is the face of the story? ##

* One city or several?
* A school?
* A team?
* A class?
* Multiple characters or one?
* A teacher or a student?
* A family?

Commit message:

Add examples of representations of people

20150305-1520-humanizing_numbers.md, after:

# Humanizing Numbers #

**Moderator:** Ron Nixon, The New York Times

**Speakers:**

* Ryan Gabrielson, ProPublica
* Katie Park, The Washington Post
* Nikole Hannah-Jones, ProPublica

Numbers simply represent something in the real world.

A data story doesn't need to be packed full of numbers to be powerful; choose
carefully what you need in order to tell the story, and talk about its human
impacts.

## Resegregation ##

**Premise**: Once districts were released from desegregation court orders,
their schools immediately get quite a bit more segregated.

**Interactive:** [Segregation Now](http://projects.propublica.org/segregation-now/)

**Story:** [Segregation Now](http://www.propublica.org/article/segregation-now-the-resegregation-of-americas-schools)

Created an index measuring percentage of black students attending schools in
which at least 90 percent of the students are minorities.

### Who is the face of the story? ###

* One city or several?
* A school?
* A team?
* A class?
* Multiple characters or one?
* A teacher or a student?
* A family?

In this case, multiple generations of one family, spanning pre- and
post-desegregation experiences, ending with student currently experiencing
effects.

## Representations##

Icons can be dehumanizing; instead of icons, Katie represented victims with
their given names or with individual drawings.

Other pieces have used photos of the people being discussed.

Presenting cases one at a time for a while also helps readers understand the
gravity of a situation.
